---
layout: post
title: How to learn how to throw
author: Jenny Li
abstract: Optimizing your path to becoming an elite thrower.
---

*This was originally written to prepare for a “guest lecture” given to Grim in fall of 2023.*

To start, I want to make it clear I’m giving advice about **learning how to throw**, not how to throw – I’m not an elite thrower, and there’s players around you who are probably more proficient than me. But I think where I stand out is that I’ve approached learning to throw with intention and analysis, which has helped me progress faster than your average ultimate player.

**1. Future-proof your throws by focusing on your mechanics NOW rather than focusing on immediate outcomes.**

It’s easy to teach someone to throw a flick or backhand that can reliably travel 10-20 yards in no wind. The problem is those players think “ok that’s good enough, I’ve learned the correct form,” and they start trying to huck and throwing break and a bunch of fancy things, only to struggle with consistency and distance later down the line. If they’re lucky, someone will tell them in a couple years, “hey your mechanics are a bit off,” and they get to spend a month correcting a wrong habit. If they’re unlucky, they never truly fix a fundamental flaw in their throws and are never able to reach the level of an elite thrower.

So, here’s how I would approach throwing mechanics:
- *Check your grip*. There are “correct” variations and “incorrect” variations. For both the flick and backhand, you should be pressing into the flight rings for a firm grip. The disc should be in line with your forearm (a big future-proofing part for the forehand). Newer players struggle with this; players can “push” the disc 20 yards, but once the arm and body come into play, nothing lines up.
- *Wrist, Arm (Elbow), Body*. These are the three components for both the forehand and backhand. A max-distance huck requires all three with great timing and alignment. This is analogous to a baseball player perfecting their swing. However, in ultimate frisbee, your job is harder. You must learn how to isolate the three in progression (wrist, wrist + arm, wrist + arm + body, known as whips). At shorter distances, to maximize efficiency, you want to rely on the smaller whips, the wrist and arm. As you increase distance, you should incorporate the larger whips WITHOUT losing any of the snap of the smaller whips. For example, I’ve seen a lot of players depend on the arm snap too much and lose the wrist snap – without the isolation between the two, you’ll discover later on that you have trouble throwing with touch (e.g., a zippy upline vs a upline that sits). I’ve seen players who use all 3 whips for 15-yard throws. This is incredibly inefficient, and you’ll realize that you have trouble throwing quick releases and at different release points.
- *Efficiency*. With these three components, make them efficient! For example, a lot of players have different ways they draw their arm back – this is fine as long as the throw comes together at the release efficiently. Avoid big looping motions, and don’t settle for “oh but it works for me though” – it will come back to bite you.

This is what I mean by future-proofing – keep in mind the versatility you want to have in your throws in the future, and spend time EARLY to establish good fundamentals in your grip, motion, and efficiency. It’ll be slow and frustrating at first, but it’ll make incorporating variations to your throws so much easier – for instance, if your wrist snap is good, high releases will be very easy to add. If you have a good grip and your arm motion is efficient and lines up with your wrist snap, hucks will come with body motion, without having to rework your entire arm whip.

How does this work in practice?

**2. Do research – watch film and players. Film yourself and be incredibly critical of your throwing form.**

I recommend spending time to watch film purely with the intention of paying attention to throwing mechanics, both in throwing form videos and in high-level games. Instructional videos and articles can be helpful, but beware, some give bad advice – look for content from elite club players and take other videos with a grain of salt. Over time, you’ll get a better sense of what elite throwers do. Visualize yourself in the same scenarios making particular throws. Stand in front of a mirror and experiment with your throwing motion. Be deeply analytical and critical of what you notice and feel – what angles are you making with your wrist and elbow and disc? Do you feel your motion contributing to an efficient release and snap? In general, do you “look” like an elite thrower? That can be a good starting point for adjusting your form. For me, once I’ve noticed something about my mechanics, I like to remember cues to bring with me to practice, something like “elbow out, elbow first.” 

As you play during practice and games, use cues to ingrain a certain adjustment to your form. At a certain point, film yourself or watch game film of yourself to check you’re making progress in the right direction. Pick specific players to emulate, either in film or in your teammates.

**3. Grow your arsenal with game-applicable variations of “basic throws.”**

Recognize that within the forehand and backhand are hundreds of variations. Learning these is a better use of your time early on. I tend to have what I call my R+D throws – throws I’m actively experimenting with and trying to incorporate into throwing sessions and practices. Especially for newer players, I do not recommend making your R+D throws hammers, scoobers, off-hands, etc. Instead, pick a SPECIFIC variation of the forehand or backhand; for example, a half-pivot backhand, an I/O forehand off a backhand shimmy, a high-release backhand that fades O/I, a forehand huck that sits with touch, etc.

These throws will reinforce the three components of your mechanics; you will not be able to execute these well if you don’t have strong control over individual whips. Keep in mind that your R+D throws should focus on game-applicable scenarios; add reps where you’re pretending to be in-game – make a throw off a clap catch (left and then right hand on top), a change in grip, a power position strike, an in-cut, etc. Visualize where the mark is, how someone is cutting, and where their defender is. Again, film is a great source of inspiration for forehand and backhand variations and their relevant scenarios.

**4. Be intentional during throwing sessions.**

Throw often, and throw focused.

Not all throwing sessions are created equal. I like to distinguish sessions as:
- *Casual*. This is typically just a group of players tossing around, talking, and adding in funky throws. Casual sessions are fun, but in terms of your throwing journey, they will do little to contribute to your growth. Think of them as good maintenance if you’re looking to ingrain an adjustment.
- *Focused*. I would consider a focused session as you and a partner, no talking, counting throws, and following a detailed throwing workout. My typical focused throwing routine involves 10 throws each: flat, I/O, O/I, low release, high release, step-out (forehand and backhand), and then lefty backhands and hammers. Then I’ll add something I want to work on (usually a bit different each time) – fakes, throwing in motion, hucks, touch, etc. This whole routine only takes about 25 minutes, but it’s been incredibly important in dialing in my throws. You don’t have to adopt this routine exactly, but having a set 20-30 min workout will be 10x more effective than casually throwing for 2 hours. Ideally, you want to throw every day, but life and school will get in the way, so do your best and give yourself grace in terms of when you have time to throw. For reference, I’ll do the above routine maybe 4x/week in the several weeks leading up to a tryout or important tournament, and hopefully 2x/week otherwise. I also try to go through the whole workout during tournament warmups. If you’ve ever played an instrument, you might know that professional musicians do something similar when practicing. They’ll time-bound and detail their practice – 10 min warmup, 5 min scales, 10 min working on the first 32 bars of a solo piece, etc. Having a routine, counting your throws, and limiting time creates the best focused atmosphere, and in my opinion, is the best way to incrementally improve your throws. 
- *Workshop*. When I feel the need to experiment – maybe I saw something in film I want to try – I’ll take a stack of discs and throw by myself for a couple of hours. I call this a workshop throwing session, where it’s just you and the disc, and you can be completely focused on your mechanics (also works with a partner if both of you are experimenting and discussing throwing form). This is time I take to be in-tune with my motion; I might film myself, adjust something, or try different cues.

Ultimately, your throwing journey comes down to you. What got me started was that as a rookie, I was obsessed with learning how to throw the “right way.” I spent tons of time in front of a mirror, on a field with a stack of discs, watching instructional videos and filming myself, reading articles, etc. I think I watched Jimmy Mickle’s throwing form video every day for several months. This crazy process opened up many opportunities for me to play for better and better teams, which skyrocketed my ultimate frisbee growth in turn.

If you show up to practice with little intention and focus on throwing, you’ll be okay. In four years, through passive osmosis, you’ll be a decent thrower and player. But speeding up the process is up to you. I won’t say what I’ve said is 100% accurate…the pedagogy surrounding throwing is still very new and up to debate. But if it inspires you to simply care a little more about being intentional with your learning, you’ll find through your own journey what tips and tricks work for you, and this active approach will put you miles ahead of other players. You also have many resources around you – ask for feedback from your coaches, captains, and teammates. Share what you’re working on and listen to other opinions. Film each other, and establish throwing routines with each other. It’s a lot of work, but at some point, you might just realize how fun throwing is – a ball falls, but a disc flies.
